# DeepClean: self-supervised artefact rejection for intensive care waveform data using generative deep learning

Waveform physiological data is important in the treatment of critically ill patients in the intensive care unit. Such recordings are susceptible to artefacts and interference, which must be removed before the data can be re-used for alerting or reprocessing for clinical or research purposes. The current gold-standard is human mark-up, which is painstaking and susceptible to reproducibility issues when such recordings may span many days.
In this work, we present DeepClean; a prototype artefact detection system using a one-dimensional convolutional, variational autoencoder deep neural network. As this technique is self-supervised and only requires easily-obtained `good' data for the training process, it holds a significant advantage in that it avoids any costly manual mark-up process. For the test case of invasive arterial blood pressure signal artefact detection, we demonstrate that our algorithm can detect the presence of an artefact within a 10-second sample of data with sensitivity and specificity around 90\%. Furthermore, the system was able to identify regions of artefact within such samples with high accuracy. We show that it significantly outperforms a baseline principle component analysis approach in both signal reconstruction and artefact detection. The model is generative and therefore may also be used for imputation of missing data. Accurate removal of artefacts reduces bias and uncertainty in clinical assessment of the patient and reduces the false negative rate of ICU alarms, and is therefore a key component in providing optimal clinical care.
